# Lab Environment

Hello there!

If you're seeing this description with a live terminal on the right, you've successfully started the lab environment. **Set a username to get started!**

## Terminal Environment

We've prepared a terminal environemnt for you to learn and experiment.

- It's based on an unminimized Ubuntu 24.04 docker container
- It has direct access to your host's networking capabilities
- It has access to Docker CLI of the host

## Tooling

This terminal environment uses [Fish](https://fishshell.com/) shell running in [Zellij](https://zellij.dev/documentation/) tetrminal workspace v0.43.1

- Session information are shown in the terminal header and navigation shortcuts are shown in the footer.
- Only a single terminal session can be active at a time. A second terminal will hijack the first one.
- Terminal sessions *should* survive a browser refresh, but not a host restart.
- Zellij config `zellij.kdl` is available in case you want to customize the terminal looks or behavior
  - Known issue: mouse tracking can be a bit buggy, disable by uncommenting `mouse_mode false`
  - Hold-down `shift` key while mouse-highlighting a terminal text you wish to copy.

## Recording

- The terminal session is being recorded with [asciinema](https://asciinema.org/).

- Once you `exit` the terminal (Ctrl+D), the recording can be uploaded to your channel, make sure you create an account to keep the recording available.

## Using host terminal

If you prefer to use your host's environment, simply install an ssh server on your host (e.g., `sudo apt install openssh-server`) then connect to it from our terminal like `ssh <USER>@localhost`
