---
title: Linux Upskill Challenge
---

### What's it about?

1. Learn Linux enough to admin your own server
2. The focus is on practical skills
3. Heavily hands-on
4. Acquire skills during a month, committing of 1-2 hours each day
5. Lots of curated external links
6. Much less ‘formal’ than RHEL or Linux Foundation training

## Table of Contents

* Day 1 - **Get to know your server**: some simple commands like: `ls`, `uptime`, `free`, `df -h`, `uname -a`. Extensions on doing passwordless login with public keys and and an `ssh` config file.
* Day 2 - **Basic navigation**: Basic navigation, the "man" pages, file hierarchy
* Day 3 - **Power trip!**: Working with `sudo`, `uptime`, `timezones`, changing your hostname
* Day 4 - **Installing software, exploring the file structure**: Using 'apt' to find and install software. Use of `mc` to explore the filesystem. Looking at the contents of: `/etc/passwd`, `/etc/ssh/sshd_config` and `/var/log/auth.log`
* Day 5 - **More or less...**: Using `more`, `less` and navigating in these. Dotfiles, history, tab completion, and using the `nano` txt editor
* Day 6 - **Editing with "vim"**: Learning `vim`, the minimal knowledge, but also via `vimtutor`
* Day 7 - **The server and its services**: Installing Apache2, stopping and starting, altering the content, reading logs
* Day 8 - **The infamous "grep" and other text processors**: Hands-on with text tools like `grep`, `cat`, `more`, `less`, `cut`, `awk` and `tail` - and piping of course. (and a wave to `awk` and `sed`)
* Day 9 - **Diving into networking**: Looking at open ports with `ss`, and a nod to `netstat`, install `nmap` and test. Install `ufw`, set up, enable and test etc. Discuss security resonsibilities as the sysadmin.
* Day 10 - **Scheduling tasks**: Covering `cron`, `at`, and systemd timers
* Day 11 - **Finding things...**: Finding things with: `locate`, `find`, `grep`, `which`
* Day 12 - **Transferring files**: SFTP, the technology, clients, and copying up and down
* Day 13 - **Users and Groups**: Using `adduser`, `visudo` to setup up a restricted "helper" to manage our host
* Day 14 - **Who has permission?**: Permissions, users, groups, (ACLS and SELinux in the Extension)
* Day 15 - **Deeper into repositories...**: Repositories in more detail, how to enable "Multiverse", the role of PPAs in Ubuntu, enabling and installing from them
* Day 16 - **Archiving and compressing**: Understanding and using `tar` and `gzip`
* Day 17 - **Build from the source**: Installing from source. Discussion, using `wget` to get a tarball, `tar` to extract and then configure, make and install. Discussion of security, maintenance issues.
* Day 18 - **Logs, monitoring and troubleshooting**: Log management and rotation, `logrotate`
* Day 19 - **Inodes, symlinks and other shortcuts**: Inodes, hard links symlinks and `stat`
* Day 20 - **Scripting**: Understanding how scripting work in Linux, the shebang, permissions and $PATH. A couple of simple sample scripts based on the filtering of logs we've been doing. Resources to explore further.
* Day 21 - **What's next?**: Closing the course with some suggestions.

## Running an ubuntu container

Upcoming lessons assume an Ubuntu environment. Run the following command to launch one

```bash
docker run -it ubuntu:24.04 bash
```
